## Deep Learning-Based Raman Spectroscopy Qualitative Analysis Algorithm: A Convolutional Neural Network and Transformer Approach
#### Raman spectroscopy is a general and non-destructive detection technique that can obtain detailed information of the chemical structure of materials. In the past, when using chemometric algorithms to analyze the Raman spectra of mixtures, the challenges of complex spectral overlap and noise often limited the accurate identification of components. The emergence of deep learning has introduced a novel approach to qualitative analysis of mixed Raman spectra. In this paper, we propose a deep learning-based Raman spectroscopy qualitative analysis algorithm (RST) by borrowing the ideas of convolutional neural network and Transformer. We conducted comprehensive tests on synthetic and real Raman spectral data, and proved the effectiveness and accuracy of the algorithm. For synthetic spectra of binary to quinary mixtures, after over 100 iterations, the cosine similarity between the output labels and the synthetic labels could achieve 100% when exceeding 90% similarity and above 95% when reaching 95% similarity. For the real data of binary to quinary mixtures, the proportion of completely correct analysis results was 84.4%, and the proportion of partial results without errors was 97.78%., which showed excellent accuracy and robustness in identifying the components of complex mixtures. Furthermore, the model's interpretability has been enhanced, allowing for a deeper understanding of spectroscopic patterns aiding in mixture analysis.
